Les négociations pour la COP 2014 à Lima sur le dérèglement climatique sont difficiles. Il a été décidé d'une prolongation des travaux.
Comme futur président de la COP 2015 à Paris, je dois évidemment être attentif à ces négociations. J'ai donc décidé de retarder mon retour en France.
Source http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr, le 16 décembre 2014Je voudrais tout d'abord adresser mes remerciements à nos amis péruviens qui nous ont accueillis magnifiquement. Tout le monde a remarqué et apprécié cet accueil exceptionnel et je voudrais adresser mes félicitations particulières au président Manuel Pulgar-Vidal, et à Christiania Figueres à ses côtés, qui ont fait un excellent travail. Ensuite, je voudrais dire qu'en tant que futur président de la COP21 à Paris, c'est un grand soulagement parce que, si nous n'avions pas pu obtenir ici à Lima l'accord qui a été conclu, les choses auraient été encore plus difficiles.
Bien sûr, il reste encore du travail à faire, mais Lima fournit une bonne base de travail. Nous avons l'intention de mener ce travail ensemble, le Pérou, la France et tous les autres.
Enfin, je voudrais souligner ce qu'a noté Manuel, le «Lima Paris Action Agenda» qui a commencé ici et qui se poursuivra tout au long de l'année et à Paris. C'est l'idée que ce ne sont pas simplement les gouvernements qui agissent pour lutter contre le dérèglement climatique mais aussi les grandes communes, les régions et les entreprises, à travers des actions concrètes qui seront déclinées toute l'année et à Paris bien sûr l'an prochain où nous montrerons comment nous pouvons, très rapidement et concrètement, nous engager dans la lutte contre le dérèglement climatique.
Q - Given it took until Sunday morning to conclude this Cop 20 how hard it's going to be in Paris to get to an agreement amongst these countries with so many differences?
R - Manuel will add his own comment, but I think the work which has been done here in Lima is already very positive. It is true that it is very technical, but trough technical points there's a political will, and some compromises have been found. For instance on this very difficult question about Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC), we have an agreement which enables us to go ahead, the different nations will have to give their commitments in order to examine them. Under this difficult question of differentiation, a formula is accepted and it's pragmatic and very useful. It's true that we have a lot of work to do and when I'm looking at my own schedule for next year, there are a lot of meetings, conferences ahead to Paris 2015.
Knowing perfectly the work to be done, here in Peru a very god job has been accomplished and what is very important is the spirit we felt in all the speeches delivered. People really want to have an agreement, ambitious and with concrete actions. Obviously we're approaching technical fields but beyond them there are lives and deaths of millions of people, and all of us are aware of that. During many years we had the ghost of Copenhagen around us, but now the minds have changed and people really want to have a success. That's a good base and M. Ban Ki-Moon often says that «there's no plan B» and this is why we have to be successful.
Q - I wonder if before Paris we could expect any advance in how the countries will report their commitment?
R - It's a very important point and there's an answer in the final text, in the point 16, which requests the publication of the INDC by the secretary of the COP and to prepare by the 1st of November a report about the aggregate effect about the INDC, and it's a process which will be positive.
Q - About the novelty of the Lima text and what are the immediate priorities of COP 21?
R - The agenda must be very concrete and it means that we shall organize with the cities, the regions, the private companies and NGOs different sessions in order to push them to develop, explain and achieve concrete actions in the fight against climate change. There will be a series of conferences and, for instance, it'll start in Davos in January where they gather a lot of CEO's and ministers, and the companies will reveal their commitments. Also during the year, we'll have different sessions in different countries and in Paris we'll organize a special event dedicated to that matter. We've planned that inside the Village dedicated to the civil society it'll be possible to have a space where the companies, cities and regions can show what they're doing against climate change. It'll also be a showcase for the technology. The question of finance and technology has been dealt with during that COP 20 and it is very important.
The idea is to be very concrete and it is the way to act efficiently during 2015 - 2020 years. These projects make it possible to be very efficient before the Paris agreement. We don't want to waste time and through this Agenda we can go quickly in this period of time.
Q - Do you expect that the Paris' agreement will put the world on the path towards this 2°C ?
R - The objective of 2°C has been set by everybody. It's difficult, ambitious, but because it's ambitious it must remain our objective. Even some countries are asking to reach the compromise of 1,5°C because with 2°C the consequences are big and, of course, less than if it was 3 or 4°C. This is the objective of the different parties and obviously when the INDC will be published and the Agenda for action developed, we shall be able to check exactly where we are.Source http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr, le 16 décembre 2014